---
title: 02. Machine Learning and Deep Learning Models
tags: [Fast Campus ML]
style: border
color: info
math: true
description: This post is based on "Fast Campus Machine Learning Lecture" Since the post is summarized by Joonho Mark Lee, the contents may different.
---

<script src='https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.4/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML' async></script>

Source: [Fast Campus](https://www.fastcampus.co.kr/)

# What kinds of Machine Learning Model

# Supervised Learning

## Linear Regression

- Assume that X and Y are linear relationship.
- Since we predict the Y using line, it is easy to find the importance of X.

## Decision Tree

- By the condition of X, classify the Y.
- It is easy to understand, but overfitiing is the problem.

## KNN (K-Neares Neighbor)

- For the newest data, classify the data using k datas around.
- hyper parameter: k

## Neural Network

- Model with input, hidden, output.
- For each layer, update the weight of nodes.

## SVM (Support Vector Machine)

- Create the decision boundary that makes the distance between classes(margin) greater.

## Ensemble Learning

- Combine multiple model and predict using average or voting.

---

# Unsupervised Learning

## K-means Clustering

- Without label, k clusterings.

# What kinds of Deep Learning Model

## Neural Network

- Model with input, hidden, output.
- For each layer, update the weight of nodes.

## Deep Learning

- Using the multi-layer, we can train complex data.
- Developing of Algorithm and GPU helps to use Deep Learning.

## CNN

- Useful algorithm for analyzing the image.
- Using the matrix data when input is made.

## RNN

- Useful algorithm for analyzing sequence data.

## GAN (Generative Adversarial Network)

- Generator which makes the data and Discriminnator which evaluates the data, adversarial each other while training.
- Training Discriminator:
  - real data: 1
  - fake data: 0
- Training Generator:
  - real data: 1
  - fake data: 1
- Generator makes the fake data which is as similar as real data, so discriminator cannot determine which is real or fake.

## Reinforcement Learning

- Q-learning: How to get the best reward at the future?
- Q-learning + Deep learning: DQN
