---
title: 04-01. Introduction Object-Oriented Programming for CS246
tags: [CS 246 Object-Oriented Software Development]
style: fill
color: info
description: This post is based on University of Waterloo CS 246 Lecture by Professor Gustavo Fortes Tondello. Since the post is summarized by Joonho Mark Lee, the contents may different.
---

<script src='https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.4/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML' async></script>

Source: University of Waterloo CS 246 by Professor Gustavo Fortes Tondello

---

Contents:

- [Coupling and Cohesion](#coupling-and-cohesion)
- [Procedural vs Object-Oriented Programming](#procedural-vs-object-oriented-programming)
- [Classes](#classes)
- [Initializing Objects](#initializing-objects)

---

# Coupling and Cohesion

There are two important software design quality measurements, cohesion and coupling.

- Cohesion

  - Measure the amount of "relatedness" that a module or unit of code contains.
  - High degree of cohesion: In the Unit is very closely related and serves a single purpose. (i.e. stdio)
  - Low degree of cohesion: It makes maintenance more difficult and increase the chances of introducing error. (i.e. C math)
  - Goal: High degree of Cohesion

- Coupling
  - Measure the amount of "dependency" between units/modules.
  - More dependency between modules, the more often a change in one will cause a change in another.
  - Goal: Log Coupling

> Design your code to maximize cohesion and minimize coupling!

# Procedural vs Object-Oriented Programming

- Procedural
  - Organize by _procedure_ that implement the logic of the program and variables that hold the data.
  - The variables are passed to the procedures via parameters or are global variables.
- Object-Oriendted Programming
  - Implement our programming using objects.
  - Objects: Unit of code that contain data and the procedures that implement the logic that operates over the data.
  - The data contained within an object:
    - Attributes
    - Member Fields
  - Procedures of an objet:
    - Methods
    - Operations
    - Member function

### Steps to Create Objects

1. Define Classes(blueprints or type specification that describe the contents of an object) which desribes the attributes and methods that each object of that type can have.
2. Create Instance of a class.

> OOP is good for well-designed code.

# Classes

We can keep related pieces of information together in C/C++ by putting them into a structure, using `struct` keyword.

It improves cohesion! There is another way that C++; we can also put functions inside of a structure. This let us keep related data and functions in the same data structure, which is called a <span style="color:red">class</span>.

A class is a type. An intance of a class is called an object.

```c++
// student.h
#ifndef _STUDENT_H_
#define _STUDENT_H_

struct Student {
   int assns, mt, final;

   float grade();
};

#endif
```

From this, there exists three data fields:

- assns
- mt
- final

It has a single method, `grade`, that takes no parameters and returns the final grade in the course.

We only provide `.h` and `.o` files to our client. They'd never need to know how the final course grade was actually calculated!

```c++
// student.cc
#include "student.h"

float Student::grade() {
  return assns * 0.4 + mt * 0.2 + final * 0.4;
}
```

In the implementation file for the `Student`, we have to use <span style="color:red">scope resolution operator</span> ::, prefixed by the class name, to specify that the `grade` function is a method of the `Student` clas.

```c++
#include "student.h"
#include <iostream>

int main() {
  Student s{60, 70, 80};
  std::cout << s.grade() << std::endl;
}
```

If we want to use another student as below, let's use `this`.

```c++
Student mark{100, 100, 100}
mark.grade()
```

```c++
float Student::grade() {
  return this->assns * 0.4 + this->mt * 0.2 + this->final * 0.4;
}
```

# Initializing Objects

Our previous example used an <span style="colr:red">initializing list</span> to copy the data values into the object's data fields.

```c++
Student s{60, 70, 80}
```

This is limited in functionality, since it only copies the gieven data. Also we cannot guaranteeding that the grade are in the range 0 to 100.

Now we will use better method, called a <span style="color:red">contructor</span>. Following is the format of the constructor:

```c++
Name-of-Class-Type( parameter-list ) {
  // necessary code
}
```

- No return type, since building the actual object.
- Method name is the type name.
- Parameter list may be empty.
- Constructors can be overloaded.
- Method body may be empty, but must be present.

This is an example.

```c++
// student.h
#ifndef _STUDENT_H_
#define _STUDENT_H_

struct Student {
   int assns, mt, final;

   Student( int assns, int mt, int final );
   float grade();
};

#endif
```

```c++
// student.cc
#include "student.h"

int capGrade(int grade) {
  if (grade < 0) return 0;
  if (grade > 100) return 100;
  return grade
}

Student::Student(int assns, int mt, int final) {
  this->assns = capGrade(assns);
  this->mt = capGrade(mt);
  this->final = capGrade(final);
}

float Student::grade() {
  return assns * 0.4 + mt * 0.2 + final * 0.4;
}
```

> Constructor Advantages

1. Allow default parameters.
2. Allows overloading.
3. Allows sanity checks.
4. Allows code other than simple field initialization.
