---
title: 02. Software Testing for CS246
tags: [CS 246 Object-Oriented Software Development]
style: fill
color: info
description: This post is based on University of Waterloo CS 246 Lecture by Professor Gustavo Fortes Tondello. Since the post is summarized by Joonho Mark Lee, the contents may different.
---

<script src='https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.4/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML' async></script>

Source: University of Waterloo CS 246 by Professor Gustavo Fortes Tondello

---

Contents:

- [What are Software Tests](#what-are-software-tests)
- [Types of Software Tests](#types-of-software-tests)
- [White/Black Box Tests](#whiteblack-box-tests)
- [Best Practices and Considerations](#best-practices-and-considerations)

---

# What are Software Testing

Software testing is as importnat as writing code. There are two ways to do software Testing which are human testing and automated(machine) testing

### Human Testing

A person manually verifies whether program is intended and identify existing errors (bugs).

Test plan should be created, based on the requirement specifications. Without plan, some existing errors may not be discovered.

Some times Human Testing is goot, but it is difficult to scale human testing for large software(time-consuming).

### Automated(machine) Testing

Automatically test the software and compare the results with the expected ones. _**test suites**_ contain a list of input sets and matching expected outputs by the requirement specifications.

Also specify the necessary command-line arguments, expected error messages, and return value.

Any discrepancy is logged, so human developer can later identify the errors.

### Testing is not Debugging!

- Testing: identifies the errors but do not solve them
- Debugging: process that identifies the cause of known errors to solve them.

1. Test is conducted and an error is identified.
2. Developer debugs the code to identify the cause of the error.
3. Developer fixes and generate new version.
4. New test is conducted that the error was indeed corrected.

# Types of Software Tests

### Unit Tests

Conducted at the lowest level. Testing only one specific module/unit of the software.

### Integration Tests

Conducted a level above the unit test. Aim to verify the different module/units of the software work correctly together.

### Functional Tests (System Tests)

Focus on the business requirements of the application. Conducted by executing application with a specific set of inputs and verifying if the application produces the correct outputs.

### Acceptance Tests

A formal process in which the client must verify that the produced software meets all the requirement so it can be accepted.

- alpha testing: in the controlled environment of the developer
- beta testing: after the alpha testing, in the user's environment

### Regression Tests

Conducted after any modification in the software, to ensure that it continues working as intended. (Check that the modification did not introduce new errors)

### Performance Tests

Designed to verify if the run-time performance of the system will be adequate.

### Accessibility, Usability, and User Experience Tests

Verify the quality of the experience of the user interacting with the system.

# White/Black Box Tests

When creating software tests, we can use a white-box or black-box approach, or combine them(gre-box).

### White-box Tests

It is created with knowledge of the internal structure of program. It is generally used when we need to verify the internal structures or workings of a program, instead of the expected functional requirements.

Can do at any level, but more common for unit tests.

### Black-box Tests

It is created based only on the requirement specifications, without any knowledge of the internal structure of the program.

Goal is verify if the software works according to the specification, without being concerned with how it works.

Can do at any level, but more common for functional and acceptance tests.

### Grey-box Tests

MIXED of white and black box tests. Help the tester make better-informed decisions about how to test each requirement.

Good approach for performance tests.

### Example

Let's say our code is as below

```c
int max(int a, int b) {
    if (a > b) {
        return a;
    } else {
        return b;
    }
}
```

From the code, if we create white-box test, it will be like below:

```
Inputs: a = 5, b = 10 | Output: 10
Inputs: a = -1, b = -2 | Output: -1
```

It looks like correct. However, if the specification is as below, it might be wrong.

> Compare the absolute value of the two arguments and return the higher of them.

If this is specification, our implementation is incorrect. With this specification, we can make our black-box test:

```
Inputs: a = 5, b = 10 | Output: 10
Inputs: a = -1, b = -2 | Output: -2
```

It returns incorrect output and we can find there exists error.

Thus, when creating test cases, good practice is start with black-box tests, then supplement with grey and white-box tests.

### Creating Black-box Tests

- Identify the different classes of input (numeric: positive, negative, etc)
- Test the boundaries of valid ranges (edge case: min, max)
- Test multiple simultaneous boundaries (corner cases)
- Test extreme cases (within reason)
- Intuition: believe your experience!

### Creating White-box Tests

- Logical paths through the program
- Make sure that every function runs(check all of lines of code run)

# Best Practice and Considerations

### Testing is an ongoing operation.

Test should always begin before start coding, by creating test plans and implementing automated tests.

Then they continue while coding.

### Testing cannot guarantee correctness.

If test fail, than you can prove wrongness in the software.

If test pass, than it is not a guarantee that the software is correct. Test themselves can be woring, or may be specific cases were not covered by any test.

### Testing is not easy.

There is no formula to create good tests. There may be a psychological barrier (I don't want to find out error from my code). However, testing is realy important! It is better to identify during tests than in a real user situation.
