---
title: 04-02. Special class members for CS246
tags: [CS 246 Object-Oriented Software Development]
style: fill
color: info
description: This post is based on University of Waterloo CS 246 Lecture by Professor Gustavo Fortes Tondello. Since the post is summarized by Joonho Mark Lee, the contents may different.
---

<script src='https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.4/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML' async></script>

Source: University of Waterloo CS 246 by Professor Gustavo Fortes Tondello

---

Contents:

- [Default Constructors](#default-contructors)
- [Copy Constructors](#copy-constructors)
- [The Peril of Single Argument Constructors](#the-peril-of-single-argument-constructors)
- [Destructors](#destructors)
- [Copy Assignment Operator](#copy-assignment-operator)
- [Move Semantics](#move-semantics)
- [Copy Move Elision](#copy-move-elision)
- [Rules for Replacing default Compiler Operations](#rule-for-replacing-default-compiler-operations)
- [Member Operators](#member-operators)
- [Static Members](#static-members)

---

# Default Constructors

By definition, a default constructor is a constructor that has 0 parameters.

If you do not provide a constructor of any sort to your class, then the compiler automatically gives you a default contructor. Let's check the following example!

```c++
struct Vec {
  int x, y;

  Vec(int x, int y) {
    this->x = x;
    this->y = y;
  }
};

Vec v1{5, 6}; // this is okay!
Vec v2; // this will not compile!
```

If you remove the constructor, then `v2` will become valid and `v1` invalid. To make both valid, you neet to write two constructors.

### Initializing Constants and References

If all objects of the class will have the same constant or reference, we can initialize the constant or reference in the type definition.

```c++
int z

struct MyStruct{
  const int myConst = 5;
  int & myRef = z;
};

MyStruct m1, m2;
```

If we still want a constant or a reference, but not all objects will use the same constant or reference.

```c++
struct Student {
  const int id;
  ...
}

Student s1{1234, ...}, s2{5678, ...};
```

We need to pass the constant student id in as a parameter to our constructor. Where do we initialize it?

If we initialize it in the constructor body, that's too late since the data fields have already been created and initialize.

Constants have to be initialized when their space is allocated.

Steps in creating an object:

1. allocate space
2. constrcut the data fields
3. run the constructor body

### Member Initialization Lists

Member initialization list code must be placed as part of the constructor implementation. It occurs between the closing parenthesis of the parameter list, and the opening curly brace of the constructor body.

It conists of a `:` followed by a comma-separated list of data field names to be initialized, where each data field is initialized using uniform initialization syntax. Example is as follow:

```c++
// student.h
#ifndef _STUDENT_H_
#define _STUDENT_H_

struct Student {
  const int id;
  int assns, mt, final;

  Student(const int id, int assns = 0, int mt = 0, int final = 0);

  float grade();
};

#endif
```

```c++
// student.cc
#include "student.h"

int capGrade(int grade) {
  if (grade < 0) return 0;
  if (grade > 100) return 100;
  return grade;
}

Student::Student(const int id, int assns, int mt, int final)
  : id {id},
    assns{capGrade(assns)},
    mt{capGrade(mt)},
    final{capGrade(final)}
{}

float Student::grade() {
  return assns * 0.4 + mt * 0.2 + final * 0.4;
}
```

### Note

- The name outside of the `{}` in the MIL is the data field.
- The name inside of the `{}` is the parameter name.
- MIL can be also used to initialize other data fields.
- MIL are initialized in the order in which they are declared in the class, not in the order that they are listed in the MIL!
- MIL is more efficient than initializing in the body of the constructor. This is particularly true when the data field is an object that has a default constructor.

> MIL can only be used on constructors, not on any other method!

# Copy Constructors
