---
title: 01. Introduction for CS245
tags: [CS 245 Logic and Computaion]
style: fill
color: info
description: This post is based on University of Waterloo CS 245 Lecture by Professor Shai Ben-David. Since the post is summarized by Joonho Mark Lee, the contents may different.
---

<script src='https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.4/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML' async></script>

Source: University of Waterloo CS 245 by Professor [Shai Ben-David](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCg9V0y9_RxG7hg5GjcyS2OA)

### What is Logic?

It focuses on how to reliably get from assumptions to conclusions.

<span style="color:red">It is not about distinguishing truth from falsehood</span>.

Example: $$F=ma$$

- Physician: True or False
- Mathematician: If $$F=ma$$ then $$a=\frac{F}{m}$$
- Logician: If whenever $$X=yz$$ then $$y =\frac{X}{z}$$. This statement works then if $$F=ma$$ then $$a=\frac{F}{m}$$

---

### Example of Logical Argument

- Socrates(first logician): If all men are mortal and I am a man, then I am mortal.

- Russell's Paradox: The baraber in the village shaves every man in the village that does not shave themselves.
  Does the barber shave himself?

- Berry's Paradox:

  Number that can be precisely described by an English sentence:

  - ten
  - ten to the power ten
  - the number of hairs on the heads of all students in the class
  - 721638354812638

  B = all numbers that can be described by an English Sentence of at most 200 characters.
  Is B a finite set?

  Yes, since there are at most 26 ^200 such combinations of characters.
  "The first number that cannot be described by an English Sentence of at most 200 characters"

- More example:

```
1. At least one of the statements in this box is false.
2. Mark is not going to be millionaire by the age of 25
```

---

### Goal of Formal Logic

- Develop Reliable tools for going from assumptions to implied conclusions.
- Do not rely on any Natural Language(ambiguous) for that purpose.
- Constructing(and analyzing) formal languages.
  - Propositional Logic: $$p\lor q \implies s$$
  - First Order Logic: $$\forall x \exists y(y > x)$$
  - etc.

---

### Syntax vs Sementics

Syntax: Form of the language

Sementics: Meaning of the language

1. Develop the system purely on the synstax side.
2. Show that this coincides with what we intended derivation in such a system to mean.

---

### Syntax of Propositional Logic

Defined the set of all valid _**Words**_ in this language.

These will form the set of <span styl="color:red">Well Formed Formulas</span>

---

### How to Define Sets?

1. Make a list of all elements of the set (0,2,4,...)
2. Identifying a common characteristic (number that are divisible by 2)
3. Inductive definition

---

### Inductive Definitions of Sets

Use Inductive Definition of sets when:

- <span style="color:red">I cannot make a list</span>
- <span style="color:red">I cannot give a common characteristic</span>

It is consists of followings:

1. Universe set: $$X$$
2. Core set: $$A\subseteq X$$
3. Set of Operations($$P$$): Functions from $$X\times X \times ...\times X \to X$$. Requires that $$P$$ is finite.

Define <span style="color:red">$$I(A,P)$$</span> as the set of elements of $$X$$ that contains $$A$$ and is closed under the operations in $$P$$.

$$I(A,P) = \cap \{B \subseteq X: A \subseteq B, B \space closed\space under P\}$$

##### <span style="color:blue">Example</span>

$$X = \mathbb{R} , A= {5}, P = \{f1: x->x+1, f2: x->x-1\}$$

$$I(A,P) = \mathbb{I}$$
$$W(A,P)= \{B \subseteq X: A \subseteq B, B \space closed\space under P\}$$

---

### Claim

(i) $$A \subseteq \cap W(A,P)$$

(ii) $$\cap W(A,P)$$ is closed under $$P$$

(iii) $$\cap W(A,P)$$ is the minimal set satisfying (i) and (ii)

(iv) There is no other set satisfying (i),(ii), and (iii)

---

##### Proof (ii)

Pick $$b_1, B_2 \in \cap W$$ and pick some $$f \in P$$, then $$f(b_1, b_2) \in \cap W$$.

Pick any $$B \in W(A,P),\space b_1,b_2 \in B,\space B$$ is closed, so $$f(b_1, b_2) \in B$$.

##### Proof (iii)

Let $$D$$ be any set satisfying (i), (ii) then $$\cap W \subseteq D$$, since in this case $$ D\in W$$.

##### Proof (iv)

If $$E_1, E_2$$ are minimal set, then $$E_1 \subseteq E_2$$ and $$E_2 \subseteq E_1$$.

Thus $$E_1 = E_2$$.

---

### Some Background in Set Notation

Define: $$\cap W = \{x: \forall B \in W, x \in B\}$$

Define: $$\cup W = \{x: \exists B \in W, x \in B\}$$

##### <span style="color:blue">Example 1</span>

$$W = \{\{a\},\{a,b,c\},\{a,c\}\}$$

$$\cap W = \{a\}$$

$$\cup W = \mathbb{R}$$

##### <span style="color:blue">Example 2</span>

$$W = \{(-R,R) : R > 0\}$$

$$\cap W = \{0\}$$

##### <span style="color:blue">Example 3</span>

$$W = \{(0,R) : R > 0\}$$

$$\cap W = \emptyset $$

---

### Claim

For Every $$W$$ and every $$B \in W$$

(a) $$\cap W \subseteq B$$

(b) $$B \subseteq \cup W$$

---

### Construction Sequence

A Construction sequence for an expresion $$\alpha$$ is a finite sequence $$\alpha$$ = $$\alpha_1$$, $$\alpha_2$$, ..., $$\alpha_n$$ such that each $$\alpha_i$$ is either a member of the core set A or it is the result of applying some $$f \in P$$ to previously occuring $$\alpha_j$$, $$\alpha_k$$ where $$j$$, $$k < i$$ .

##### Claim

For every $$X$$, $$A$$, $$P$$, and expression $$\alpha \in I(A,P)$$ if and only if there exists a construction sequence for $$\alpha$$ .
