---
title: 03. Semantics of Propoitional Logic for CS245
tags: [CS 245 Logic and Computaion]
style: fill
color: info
description: This post is based on University of Waterloo CS 245 Lecture by Professor Shai Ben-David. Since the post is summarized by Joonho Mark Lee, the contents may different.
---

Source: University of Waterloo CS 245 by Professor [Shai Ben-David](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCg9V0y9_RxG7hg5GjcyS2OA)

###### 1. The Semantics is based on two truth values {True, False}.

###### 2. We start with a given truth assignment to propositional variables.

$$v: S \to \{T,F\}$$ where $$S$$ is a set of propositional varibales.

| $$P_1$$ | $$P_2$$ | $$P_3$$ |
| ------- | ------- | ------- |
| T       | F       | F       |

###### 3. We define how to extend such an assignment to assign truth values to every propositional formula over $$S$$.

$$\bar V$$: Propositional Formulas over S $$\to \{T,F\}$$

###### 4. We define the extension by 4 fixed truth tables.

| $$\alpha$$ | $$\neg \alpha$$ |
| ---------- | --------------- |
| T          | F               |
| F          | T               |

| $$\alpha $$ | $$\beta$$ | $$\alpha \land \beta$$ | $$\alpha \lor \beta $$ | $$\alpha \to \beta$$ |
| ----------- | --------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------- | -------------------- |
| T           | T         | T                      | T                      | T                    |
| T           | F         | F                      | T                      | F                    |
| F           | T         | F                      | T                      | T                    |
| F           | F         | F                      | F                      | T                    |

---

### The Formal Definition of the function $$\bar V$$ is recursive.

1. If $$\alpha$$ is a propositional variables then $$\bar V(\alpha) = v(\alpha)$$
2. If $$\alpha = (\neg \beta)$$ then $$\bar V(\alpha) = F$$ if $$\bar V(\beta) = T$$
3. If $$\alpha = (\beta \lor \gamma)$$ then $$\bar V(\alpha) = T$$ unless both $$\bar V(\beta) = F$$ and $$\bar V(\gamma) = F$$
4. If $$\alpha = (\beta \land \gamma)$$ then check Table above!
5. If $$\alpha = (\beta \to \gamma)$$ then check Table above!

| $$\alpha $$ | $$\beta$$ | $$((p\to q)\lor (p\to q))$$ |
| ----------- | --------- | --------------------------- |
| T           | T         | T                           |
| T           | F         | T                           |
| F           | T         | T                           |
| F           | F         | T                           |

---

# Why is it Well Defined?

### Lemma:

For Every WFF $$\alpha$$, exactly one and only one of the following statements hold:

(i) $$\alpha$$ is and propositional variable

(ii) $$\alpha = (\neg \beta)$$ for some WFF $$\beta$$

(iii) $$\alpha = ( \beta \lor \gamma)$$ for some WFF $$\beta, \gamma$$

(iv) $$\alpha = ( \beta \land \gamma)$$ for some WFF $$\beta, \gamma$$

(v) $$\alpha = ( \beta \to \gamma)$$ for some WFF $$\beta, \gamma$$

---

### Claim:

Uniqueness of the extension $$\bar V$$ :

For every truth assignment $$V$$, and every WFF $$\alpha$$ there is only one value for $$\bar V(\alpha)$$ that is consistent with over definition of $$\bar V$$.

### Proof: (Generalized Induction)

Base Step: $$\alpha = p$$ we defined in this case $$\bar V(\alpha) = V(\alpha)$$ so unique.

Induction Step: $$\alpha = (\beta \lor \gamma)$$

By the previous Lemma there is no other way to parse $$\alpha$$.

$$\bar V$$ is True unless both $$\bar V(\beta) = F$$ and $$\bar V(\gamma) = F$$

Now invoke the induction hypothesis to get uniqueness of $$\bar V(\beta)$$ and $$\bar V(\gamma)$$.

---

### 1. Basic Semantic Notions: Satisfiable

A Propoition $$\alpha$$ is <span style="color:red"> satisfiable </span> if there exists some truth assignment $$V$$, such that $$\bar V (\alpha) = T$$

### Example(Satisfiable):

$$ \alpha = ((p \lor q) \to (p \land (\neg q)))$$

| $$p$$ | $$q$$ | $$p \lor q$$ | $$\neg q$$ | $$p\land (\neg q)$$ | $$\alpha$$ |
| ----- | ----- | ------------ | ---------- | ------------------- | ---------- |
| T     | T     | T            | F          | F                   | F          |
| T     | F     | T            | T          | T                   | T          |
| F     | T     | T            | F          | F                   | F          |
| F     | F     | F            | T          | F                   | T          |

### Example(Not Satisfiable)

$$p \land (\neg p)$$

---

### How difficult is it to figure out it a given prop formula is satisfiable?

- If $$\alpha$$ contains $$n$$ variables, $$p_1, ... ,p_n$$ and we wish to check by writing the complete truth table, we need $$2^n$$ rows.
- Can it be done faster?

---

### 2. Basic Semantic Notions: Tautology

$$\alpha$$ is a <span style="color:red">tautology</span>, for every truth assignment to the variables of $$\alpha$$, $$\bar V(\alpha) = T$$.

### Example:(tautology)

$$
\alpha = (\alpha \lor (\neg \alpha))
$$

$$
\alpha = ((p\to q) \lor (q\to p))
$$

$$
\alpha = (((\neg \alpha) \to (\neg b)) \to (b \to a))
$$

### De Morgan Rules

For every $$\alpha, \beta, \gamma $$. The following are tautologies

$$(\neg (\alpha \land \beta)) \leftrightarrow ((\neg \alpha) \lor (\neg \beta))$$

$$(\neg (\alpha \lor \beta)) \leftrightarrow ((\neg \alpha) \land (\neg \beta))$$

---

### Claim:

$$\alpha$$ is a tautology if and only if $$(\neg \alpha)$$ is not satisfiable.

---

### 3. Basic Semantic Notions: Contradiction

$$\alpha$$ is <span style="color:red">contradiction</span>, if for every truth assignments $$V$$, $$\bar V (\alpha) = F$$

---

### Practice:

Is it the case that every tautology $$\alpha$$ is the form $$(\neg \beta)$$ for some contradiction $$\beta$$? No!

Counter Example: $$ ((A \to (B \to C)) \to ((A\to B)\to (A \to C))) $$

Is it the case that every contradiction $$\alpha$$ is of the form $$(\neg \beta)$$ for some tautology $$\beta$$? No!

Counter Example: $$(A \land (\neg A))$$

---

### Claim:

$$\alpha$$ is tautology iff $$(\neg \alpha)$$ is contradiction.

---

### 4. Basic Semantic Notions: Logically Implies

$$\alpha$$ <span style="color:red">logically implies</span> $$\beta$$ if, for every truth assignment $$V$$, if $$\bar V(\alpha) = True$$ then also $$\bar V(\beta) = True$$.

### Example:

$$\alpha \equiv A$$ and $$\beta \equiv (A \lor B)$$

---

### 5. Basic Semantic Notions: Logically Equivalent

$$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ are <span style="color:red">logically equivalent</span> if each of them logically implies the other.

### Example:

$$\alpha \equiv (A \land B)$$ and $$\beta \equiv (B \land A)$$

$$\alpha \equiv p$$ and $$\beta \equiv (\neg(\neg P))$$

---

### Claim:

$$\alpha$$ logically implies $$\beta$$ if and only if $$(\alpha \to \beta)$$ is a tautology.

### Proof:

Assume $$\alpha$$ logically implies $$\beta$$.

By way of contradiction, if $$(\alpha \to \beta)$$ is not a tautology then for some truth assignment $$V$$, $$\bar V(\alpha \to \beta) = False$$.

By the truth table of $$\to$$, for that truth assignment $$V$$, we get $$V(\alpha) = True$$ and $$V(\beta) = False$$.

Contradicting our assumption!

Now we can do the other direction!

---

### Claim:

If $$\alpha$$ is a contradiction, then for every $$\beta$$, $$\alpha$$ logically imply $$\beta$$.

### Prove:

The logical implication holds vacousely. Since $$\alpha$$ is never True.

---

# Semantics Notions Regarding Sets

Let $$\sum$$ denote a set of propositional formulas,

### 6. Semantic Notions: Satisfiable

$$\sum$$ is satisfiable if there exists some truth assignment $$V$$ such that for every $$\alpha \in \sum$$, $$\bar V(\alpha) = True$$

### Example:

Let $$\sum_1 = \{P_1, P_2, ..., P_n ,...\} $$ all propositional variables.

$$\sum_1$$ is satisfiable, as demonstrated by the all $$T$$ truth assignment.

Let $$\sum_2 = \{(p_i \to p_j): i, j \in \mathbb{N}\}$$

---

### 7. Semantic Notions: Logically Implies

Let $$\sum$$ be a set of formulas, and $$\alpha$$ a formula, we say that $$\sum$$ logically implies $$\alpha$$, denoted $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$, if for every truth assignment V, if for all $$\beta \in \sum$$ , $$\bar V(\beta) = True$$ then also $$\bar V(\alpha) = True$$.

### Example:

Recall that $$\sum_1 = \{P_i: i \in \mathbb{N}\}$$

\\(\sum_1 \vDash ((\neg P_7)\to P_5)\\)

---

### Claim:

When $$\sum$$ consists of just one formula $$\alpha$$, $$\sum = \{\alpha\}$$. Then, for any $$\beta$$, $$\sum \vDash \beta$$ if and only if $$\alpha$$ logically implies $$\beta$$.

### Notation:

We will therefore use the same notation for logical implication between formulas. $$\alpha \vDash \beta$$

---

### Claim:

If $$\sum$$ contains a contradiction then for every formula $$\alpha$$, $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$.
(This hold vacousely.)

---

### Claim:

If $$\sum$$ is a finite set of formulas, $$\sum = \{\alpha_1, ..., \alpha_n\}$$ then, for every $$\beta$$, $$\sum \vDash \beta$$ if and only if $$(\alpha_1 \land ... \land \alpha_n) \vDash \beta$$.

If you assume a contradiction then any statement follows!

---

# Some non-trivial statements about these notions

### The compatctness Theorem:

For every set of formulas $$\sum$$, $$\sum$$ is satisfiable if and only if every finite subset $$\sum' \subseteq \sum$$ is satisfiable.

### Craig's Interpolation Theorem:

Whenever $$\alpha \vDash \beta$$ then there exists a forlumla $$\gamma$$ susch that:

1. Every propositional variable in $$\gamma$$ appears both in $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$.
2. $$\alpha \vDash \gamma$$ and $$\gamma \vDash \beta$$.

---

Our Definition of propositional logic was based on the connectives $$\{\neg, \land, \lor, \to\}$$.

How general does it make our logic?

---

### Truth Functional

A truth functional is a function $$f$$ from $$\{T, F\}^n$$ for some n, to $$\{T, F\}$$.

### Example:

Each of the 4 truth tables is a truth functional.

### Another Example1:

NAND:

$$T$$ NAND $$T$$ $$\to$$ $$F$$

$$T$$ NAND $$F$$ $$\to$$ $$T$$

$$F$$ NAND $$T$$ $$\to$$ $$T$$

$$F$$ NAND $$F$$ $$\to$$ $$T$$

### Another Example2:

For every odd number $$n$$. Let $$Maj_n$$ be the majoiryt over $$\{T, F\}^n$$

$$Maj_5(T,T,T,F,F) = T$$

---

# Definition: Adequate

A set of truth functionals is called adequate if propositional formulas over that set can express every possible truth funcional.

### Example:

Find $$\alpha$$(in $$\{\neg, \land, \lor, \to\}$$) that expresses $$Maj_3$$ A,B,C.

$$
\alpha \equiv ((A\land B)\lor (B\land C)\lor (A\land C))
$$

---

### Theorem:

The set $$\{\neg, \land, \lor, \to\}$$ is adequate.

### Proof:

Let $$f$$ be any truth functional.

Consider the truth table describing $$f$$.

A literal is either a propositional variable or its negation.

A monomial is a conjunction ($$\land$$) of literals.

A disjunction of literals is a formula of the form $$l_1 \lor .. \lor l_k$$ where each $$l_i$$ is a literal.

For each row $$i$$ in the truth table of f, let $$\alpha_i$$ be the monomial $$l_1^i \land ... \land l_n^i$$ where $$l_j^i = p_j$$ if the $$j^{th}$$ variable in the $$i^{th}$$ row get value T and $$\neg P$$.

$$ \alpha_1$$ = $$p_1 \land ... \land p_n $$

$$ \alpha\_{2^n}$$ = $$((\neg p_1) \land ... \land (\neg p_n)) $$

### Example

|              | $$P_1$$ | $$P_2$$ | $$P_3$$ | $$f()$$ |
| ------------ | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- |
| $$\alpha_1$$ | T       | T       | T       | T       |
| $$\alpha_2$$ | T       | T       | F       | F       |
| $$\alpha_3$$ | T       | F       | T       | F       |
| $$\alpha_4$$ | T       | F       | F       | T       |
| $$\alpha_5$$ | F       | T       | T       | T       |
| $$\alpha_6$$ | F       | T       | F       | T       |
| $$\alpha_7$$ | F       | F       | T       | T       |
| $$\alpha_8$$ | F       | F       | F       | F       |

$$
\alpha_f

\equiv ((p_1 \land p_2 \land p_3)\lor(p_1 \land (\neg p_2) \land (\neg p_3))\lor((\neg p_1) \land p_2 \land p_3)\lor((\neg p_1) \land p_2 \land (\neg p_3))\lor((\neg p_1) \land (\neg p_2) \land p_3))


$$

$$
\alpha_f \equiv \alpha_1 \lor \alpha_4 \lor \alpha_5 \lor \alpha_6 \lor \alpha_7
$$

### Conclusion:

$$\{\neg, \land, \lor\} $$ is adequate.

Note the if a set $$S$$ of functions is adequate and $$S \subseteq S'$$ then $$S'$$ is also adequate.

### Corollary

$$\{\neg, \land, \lor, \rightarrow\} $$ is adequate.

---

### Claim:

The set of connectives $$\{\land, \lor, \rightarrow\}$$ is not adequate.

### Proof:

We wish to show that there exists a truth function $$f$$ such that $$f \notin I(propositional variables, \{\land, \lor, \rightarrow\})$$

Let us pick the property $$f(T,T,...,T) = T$$.

$$V_t(f) = T$$ where $$V_t$$ is the all-T assignment.

Let us show that this applies to every $$f \in I(A, \{\neg, \land, \lor\})$$ by generalized induction.

##### Base Case:

Trivially holds for $$\alpha \equiv p$$ for any $$p$$.

##### Induction Step:

Assume $$\alpha_1, \alpha_2$$ satisfy the claim, show that so do $$(\alpha_1 \land \alpha_2), (\alpha_1 \lor \alpha_2), (\alpha_1 \rightarrow \alpha_2)$$.

---

### Claim:

The set $$\{\neg, \lor \}$$ is adequate.

### Proof:

It suffices to show that $$\{\neg, \lor \}$$ can express every connectives in some know to be adequate set $$S$$.

In particular, if suffices to show that we can express (the truth table of) $$\land$$ by $$\{\neg, \lor \}$$.

| $$p_1$$ | $$p_2$$ | $$(\neg((\neg p_1)\lor (\neg p_2)))$$ |
| ------- | ------- | ------------------------------------- |
| T       | T       | T                                     |
| T       | F       | F                                     |
| F       | T       | F                                     |
| F       | F       | F                                     |

---

### Semantic Notions for sets of Proposition

We saw:

1. $$\sum$$ is satisfiable
2. $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$.

### A new Notion:

$$\sum$$ is complete if for every propositional formula $$\alpha$$, either $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$ or $$\sum \vDash \neg \alpha$$.

$$\sum_1$$ = $$\{(\neg p_1), (\neg p_2), ...\} $$

$$\sum_1 \vDash \alpha$$ if and only if $$V_F(\alpha)$$ = $$T$$ where $$V_F$$ is the all-F assignment.

Therefer for every $$\alpha$$, either $$\sum_1 \vDash \alpha$$ or $$\sum_1 \vDash \neg \alpha$$.

$$\sum_2$$ = $$\{p_1, (\neg p_1)\} $$

$$\sum$$ is a complete and satisfiable if it is both complete and satisfiable.

Such $$\sum$$ has, for every $$\alpha$$, $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$ or $$\sum \vDash \neg \alpha$$ but never both.

---

### Theorem:

The set of vectors $$A$$ in some vector space $$V$$ is a basis if and only if it is a linearly independent set and it spans $$V$$ if and only if it is a maximal independent set.

$$\sum$$ is maximally satisfiable if $$\sum is satisfiable and for every $$\alpha$$, if $$\sum \nvDash \alpha$$ then $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\}$$ is not satisfiable.

---

### Theorem:

For every set of propositional formulas $$\sum$$ the following are equivalent:

1. $$\sum$$ is complete and satisfiable.
2. $$\sum$$ is maximally satisfiable.

### Proof:

##### 1 -> 2

Let $$\sum$$ be complete and satisfiable, given $$\alpha$$, if $$\sum \nvDash \alpha$$ then, by completeness, $$\sum \vDash (\neg \alpha)$$, therefore $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha \} is not satisfiable.

##### 2 -> 1

Let $$\sum$$ be max-satisfiable need to show it is complete. Pick any $$\alpha$$, either $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$ or, if $$\sum \nvDash \alpha$$, then $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} i not satisfiable. Namely, any assignment V that satisfies $$\sum$$ fails to satisfy $$\alpha$$.

Therefore, such an assignment satisfies $$\neg \alpha$$. Thus, $$\sum \vDash (\neg \alpha)$$.

---

### Thinking Exercise:

Prove that any $$\sum$$ is maximally satisfiable if and only if there is exactly one $$V$$ that satisfies all formulas in $$\sum$$.

---

# Review

$$\sum$$ of wff's

- is "satisfiable": if $$\exists v$$ such that $$v(\alpha) = T$$ for $$\forall \alpha \in \sum$$
- is "logically implies $$\alpha$$" ($$\sum \vDash \alpha$$): if $$\forall v$$ satisfy $$\sum$$ then $$v(\alpha) = T$$
- is "complete" for $$\alpha$$ $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$ or $$\sum \vDash (\neg \alpha)$$.
- is "maximally satisfiable" for $$\alpha$$ whenever $$\sum \nvDash \alpha) then $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha \}$$ not satisfiable

### Theorem

$$\sum$$ is complete and satisfiable if and only if $$\sum$$ is maximally satisfiable.

### Fact

$$\sum \vDash \alpha$$ if and only if $$\sum$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha \} $$ is not satisfiable.

$$\sum \nvDash \alpha$$ if and only if $$\sum$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha \} $$ is satisfiable.

---

### Theorem(Finite Models)

$$\sum \vDash \alpha, \exists \sum_0 \subseteq \sum, \sum_0$$ finite

$$\sum_0 \vDash \alpha$$.

### Idea

> restrict $$\sum$$ to the varibales in $$\alpha$$.

$$\sum$$= $$\{(p_0 \lor p_1),(p_0 \lor p_2),...,(p_0 \lor p_i),...\}$$

$$\alpha$$ = $$p_0$$

### Intuition

> look at truth table for alpha

| $$p_0$$ | $$p_1$$ | $$p_2$$ | . . . | $$p_n$$ | $$\alpha$$ |
| ------- | ------- | ------- | ----- | ------- | ---------- |
| F       | F       | F       | . . . | F       | F          |
| .       | .       | .       | . . . | .       | T          |
| :       | :       | :       | : : : | :       | :          |
| .       | .       | .       | . . . | .       | F          |
| T       | T       | T       | . . . | T       | T          |

From this we only care about when $$\alpha = F$$. ($$\sum \vdash \alpha$$)

### Proof

Let $$v_i$$ be the $$i^{th}$$ truth assignment for the False entries. ($$v_i(\alpha)=F)$$

Consider $$\sum$$ under $$v_i$$, because $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$ we know $$\exists \alpha_i \in \sum$$, $$v_i(\alpha_i) = F$$.

Define $$\sum = \{\alpha_i \mid for all i \}$$,

---

### Claim

$$\sum_0 \vDash \alpha$$ ($$\sum_0$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha\} not satisfiable)

Assume by way of contradiction $$\sum_0$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha\}$$ is satisfiable.

Which means $$\exists v, v(\neg \alpha) = T, v(\alpha) = F$$

Since v satisfies $$\sum_0$$ then $$v(\alpha_i) = T \forall i$$

Thus, Contradiction!

---

### Definition

$$\sum$$ is finitely satisfiable (FS) if and only if $$\forall \sum_0 \subseteq \sum$$, $$\sum_0$$ finite, then $$\sum_0$$ is also satsifiable.

---

### Theorem (Compactness Theorem)

$$\sum$$ is satisfiable if and only if $$\sum$$ is FS.

"Finite Models" if and only if "Compactness Theorem"

<= By Contrapositive

Suppose $$\forall \sum_0 \subseteq \sum$$, $$\sum_0$$ is finite $$\sum_0 \nvDash \alpha$$.

From that $$\sum \_0$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha \}$$ is satisfiable.

=> $$\sum U \{\neg \alpha \}$$ is satisfiable(compactness)

applied to $$\sum$$ U $${\neg \alpha}$$ and if a finite subset is satisfiable, then so is any subset of that.

=> $$\sum \nvDash \alpha$$

but => harder (exercise)

---

### Proof Outline (Compactness)

- extend $$\sum$$ to $$\sum \subseteq \delta$$, $$\delta$$ is also FS for every $$\alpha$$, either $$\alpha \in \delta$$, $$\neg \alpha \in \delta$$.
- find a $$v$$ that satisfies $$\delta$$
- $$v$$ satisfies $$\sum$$

### Lemma 1

> There exists some ordering all wff's $$\alpha_1, \alpha_2, ..., \alpha_i ... $$ such that every wff has a unique index.

### Idea

> Sort all wff's

Problem even $$\mid \alpha \mid =k $$ there are infinitely many indices.

### Solution

$$f: \{\neg, \land, \lor, \to, (, ) \}$$ U $$A \to \mathbb{N}$$

There is such an f (say by sorting A).

We have $$\alpha$$ = $$x_1, x_2, ... x_n$$.

(Godel numbering) $$p_1^{f(x_1)} p_2^{f(x_2)} ... p_n^{f(x_n)}$$ where $$p_i$$ is the $$i^{th}$$ prime number.

Theorem of arithmetic applies any number => $$f(x_1), ... , f(x_n)$$

$$f(x_i)$$ is the number of $$i^{th}$$ prime

### Lemma 2

> If $$\sum$$ is FS, then $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} $$ or $$\sum$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha\}$$ are FS.

Assume by way of contradition $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} $$ and $$\sum$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha\}$$ are not FS.

$$\sum_0 \subseteq \sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} $$ -> not fs

$$\sum_1 \subseteq \sum$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha\}$$ -> not fs

$$\sum ' = \sum_0$$ U $$\sum_1$$ \ $$\{\alpha. \neg \alpha\}$$ $$\subseteq \sum$$, finite

=> $$\sum '$$ must be satisfiable => $$\exists v$$ satisfies $$\sum '$$

=> either $$v(\alpha)$$ = T or $$v(\neg \alpha)$$ = F.

=> satisfies $$\sum_0$$ or $$\sum$$

Thus, contradiction!

Construct $$\delta$$

$$\delta_0 = \sum$$

By Lemma 1, we have $$\alpha_i$$

For every i,

$$\delta_{i+1} = $$\delta_i$$ U $$\{\alpha_i \} $$ if FS

$$\delta_{i+1} = $$\delta_i$$ U $$\{\neg \alpha_i \} $$ else (this is FS)

Lemma 2 says well-defined.

$$\delta = U_{i\geq 0} \delta$$

What about $$\delat$$?

- $$\sum \subseteq \delta$$
- For every $$\alpha$$, either $$\alpha \in \delta$$ or $$(\neg \alpha) \in \delta$$.
- $$\delta$$ is FS ($$\delta_i$$ is FS) (every finnite subset of $$\delta$$ is also a finite subset of some $$\delta_i$$)

Show that $$\delta$$ is satisfiable.

Define

$$v(p) = T$$ if $$p\in \delta$$

$$v(p) = F$$ if $$p\nin \delta$$

$$p \in A$$

---

### Clain

> $$v(\alpha) = T $$ iff $$\alpha \in \delta$$

### Proof

By structural induction on all WFF.

##### Base Case

$$\alpha \in A$$, $$v(\alpha) = T $$ iff $$\alpha \in \delta$$

##### Inductive Step

$$\{\neg, \land\}$$ adequate

1. $$\alpha$$ = $$(\neg \beta)$$

$$v(\alpha)$$ = T

iff $$v(\beta)$$ = F (by the truth table)

iff $$\beta \nin \delta$$ (by IH)

iff $$(\neg \beta) \in \delta$$ (by $$\delta$$ construction)

2. $$\alpha$$ = $$(\beta \land \gamma)$$

$$v(\alpha)$$ = T

iff $$v(\beta)$$ = T and $$v(\gamma)$$ = T (by Truth Table)

iff $$\beta \in \delta$$ and $$\gamma \in \delta$$ (by IH)

---

### The Compactness Theorem

For every set of formulas $$\sum$$, $$\sum$$ is satisfiable if and only if every finite $$\sum ' \subseteq \sum $$ is satisfiable.
