---
title: 06. First Order Logic of Propoitional Logic for CS245
tags: [CS 245 Logic and Computaion]
style: fill
color: info
description: This post is based on University of Waterloo CS 245 Lecture by Professor Shai Ben-David. Since the post is summarized by Joonho Mark Lee, the contents may different.
---

Source: University of Waterloo CS 245 by Professor [Shai Ben-David](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCg9V0y9_RxG7hg5GjcyS2OA)

---

# The Compactness Theorem for 1st Order Logic

A set of WFF is satisfiable if and only if, every finite subset of it is satisfiable.

### Application of Compactness

Recall that a family of structures, k, is definable (in some language L) if there exists a set of L - WFFs $$\sum$$ such that $$\{M: M satisfies \sum \} = k$$. 

### Example:

The set of all infinite structure is definable (in every language L).

$$\sum_{infinity} = \{\phi_n: n\in N\}$$

$$\phi_n = $$ "There exiss at least n elements".

### What about $$K_{finite}$$ - the family of all finite structures?

##### Claim:

> $$K_{finite}$$ is not definable

##### Proof

Assume by way of contradiction, that some $$\sum_{finite}$$ defines $$K_{finite}$$.

Let $$\gamma$$ be $$\{\phi_n: n\in N\}$$ where $$\phi_n = \exists x_1, \exists x_2 ,..., \exists x_n (\neg x_1 = x_2 \land ... \land \neg x_{n-1} = x_n)$$.

Is $$\sum_{finite} $$ U $$\gamma$$ satisfiable?

No, since every structure satisfying $$\sum_{finite}$$ is finite(by our assumption) and every structure satisfying $$\gamma$$ must be infinite.

##### Subclaim

> Every finite A $$\subseteq \sum_{finite}$$ u $$\gamma$$ is satisfiable

$$\sum_{finite} = \{\phi_1, \phi_2, ...\}$$$

Let n be the maximum index of a member of $$\gamma$$

Let M* be any finite structure whose universe has more than n elements.

M* must satisfy every formula in A.

any $$\phi \in A$$ is either a member of $$\sum_{inite}$$ or $$\phi = \phi_{i}, i\leq n$$.

Contradicting the compactness theorem!

----

### Example 2 

> Consider the family of graphs G = (V, E)

Say that the **diameter** of G is k if for every u, v $$\in V$$ there is a path $$uv_1 ... v_{k-1} v$$ such that ($$uv_1) \in E$$ for all i ($$v_i v_{i+1})\in E$$ and ($$v_k v)\in E$$.

Find some $$\sum_{diameter}$$ that defines the set of all graphs of infinite diameter in the langauge L = <R( , )>.

$$\sum_{diameter} = \{\exists x \exists y \neg R(xy) \land \neg R(yx), ... , \exists x \exists y (\neg \exists V_1, ... , V_{k-1}(R(xv_1)\land R(v_1v_2)... \land R(v_{k-1}y)))\}$$

### Claim

> The family of all finite diameter graphs is not definable.

### Proof

Assume by way of contradiction that some $$\sum$$* defines the family of all finite diameter graphs.

Consider that $$\sum \* $$ U $$\sum_{diameter}$$.

Is $$\sum \* $$ U $$\sum_{diameter}$$ satisfiable? No!

However, pick any finite A $$\subseteq$$ $$\sum \* $$ U $$\sum_{diameter}$$ 

Let n be the maximum index of $$\phi_k$$ in A $$\intersection \sum_{diameter}$$.

Construct a graph $$G_n$$ that satisfies A.

Let $$G_n$$ = V,E

V = $$\{v_1, ..., v_{n+100}\}$$, E = $$\{<v_i, v_{i+1}>: i \leq n + 99}$$

Since$$G_n$$ has finite diameter, it satisfies $$\sum\*$$ and therefore A $$\intersection \sum\*$$. Since diameter($$G_n$$) > n, it satifies every $$\phi \in $$ A $$\intersection \sum\*$$.

A = (A  $$\intersection \sum\*$$) U (A  $$\intersection \sum_{diameter}$$)

$$G_n$$ satisfies A.

---

### Non standard model of arithmetic

Let us consider a language for number theory.

L = <F (addition), G (multiplication), R($$\leq$$), a, b>

N = <N, +, *, $$\leq$$, 0, 1>

> Th(N) = $$\{\phi: \phi$$ is a sentence of L so that $$N \vDash \phi \}$$

### Claim:

> There exists a structrue M that satisfies every sentence in Th(N) but is very different from N.

- It has an element with infinitly many predecessors.

Such an M is called Non standard model of arithmetic.

If M$$\vDash \phi$$ for every $$\phi \in $$ Th(M) and there exists an elemetn c $$\in U^m$$, M $$\vDash$$ R(x, y) for every s so that s(y) = c and s(x) $$\in$$ A  $$\subseteq U^m$$ where A is infinite.

Informally, c has infinitely many predecessors in M.

---

# Definition

> A structure M is a non-standard model of arithmetic if it satisfies every sentence in Th(N) and it has an element with infinitly many predecessors.

# Theorem

> There exists Non standard models of arithmetic.

### Proof

Consider the set of WFF $$\sum$$ = Th(N) U $$\{\phi_n : n \in N\}$$. The $$\phi_n$$ s are formulas in language L' = <F (addition), G (multiplication), R($$\leq$$), a, b, c>

$$\phi_n = \exists x_1 , \exists x_2, ... , \exists \x_n$$ ($$\neg x_i = x_{i+1}\land all differnet) (c \geq $$x_1$$, c \geq $$x_2$$, ... , c \geq $$x_n$$).

Note that any structure satisfying $$\sum$$ is a non-standard model of arithmetic.

For every n, M $$\vDash \phi_n$$ iff $$C^M$$ has at least many precedecessprs (with respect to R( , )).

---

The existance of non-standard model of arithmetics now follows once we show that $$\sum$$ is satisfiable.

By the compactness theorem, it suffices to show that every finite $$\sum ' \subseteq \sum$$ is satisfiable.

Given such finite $$\sum '$$, let $$n_0$$ be the maximum index of a $$\phi_i$$ in $$\sum '$$(exists since $$\sum '$$ is finite.) define $$M_{\sum '}$$ = <N, +, *, $$\leq$$, 0, 1, $$n_0 + 1$$>


