---
title: 04. Proof System of Propoitional Logic for CS245
tags: [CS 245 Logic and Computaion]
style: fill
color: info
description: This post is based on University of Waterloo CS 245 Lecture by Professor Shai Ben-David. Since the post is summarized by Joonho Mark Lee, the contents may different.
---

Source: University of Waterloo CS 245 by Professor [Shai Ben-David](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCg9V0y9_RxG7hg5GjcyS2OA)

### A Proof System for Propositional Logic

##### Desirable properties of proof systems

1. It can only prove "correct"(tautology) statements.
2. There is a "method" to check if a given object is a valid proof.
3. Every "correct" statements has a proof.

When "correct statement" stands for a propositional tautology,

A proof of $$\alpha$$ will be a truth table for $$\alpha$$ that has only T's in the right most column.

---

Our proof system consists of two components: Axioms and Deduction Rules.

##### Axioms:

The set of axioms and WFFF of one of the following forms:

- $$(\alpha \to (\beta \to \alpha))$$.
- $$((\alpha \to (\beta \to \gamma)) \to ((\alpha \to \beta) \to (\alpha \to \gamma)))$$.
- $$(((\neg \alpha)\to (\neg \beta))\to (\beta \to \alpha))$$.

##### Example:

- $$(((\neg p) \to q) \to (p \to ((\neg p)\to q)))$$.

  - Axioms! It follwos the $$(\alpha \to (\beta \to \alpha))$$.

- $$((p \to q) \to ((\neg q) \to (\neg p)))$$

  - Not an Axiom!

##### Example:

- $$p \to p$$ is not an axioms but tautology(correct).

  - Just 5 symbols every axiom has more.

---

##### Deduction Rule:

If $$\alpha$$ and $$\alpha \to \beta$$ is tautology then good to work on $$\beta$$.

- The set of provable WFF is $$I(Axioms, \{deduction\space rule\})$$
- A formal proof is a construction sequence in this structure.

Namely: $$\alpha_1, .., \alpha_n$$ is a formal proof of some $$\beta$$ if each $$\alpha_i$$ is either an axiom or the result of applying deduction rule(MP) to some $$\alpha_j, \alpha_k$$ for $$ j, k < i$$.

---

### Example

$$\alpha_1$$ = $$(\alpha \to ((\alpha \to \alpha)\to \alpha))$$ Axiom 1

$$\alpha_2$$ = $$((\alpha \to ((\alpha \to \alpha)\to \alpha)) \to ((\alpha \to (\alpha \to \alpha))\to (\alpha \to \alpha)))$$ Axiom 2

Apply MP to $$\alpha_1, \alpha_2$$ and get

$$\alpha_3$$ = $$((\alpha \to (\alpha \to \alpha))\to (\alpha \to \alpha))$$

$$\alpha_4$$ = $$(\alpha \to (\alpha \to \alpha))$$ Axiom 1

Apply MP to $$\alpha_3, \alpha_4$$, $$\alpha \to \alpha$$.

---

### Notation

We will use $$\vdash$$ to denote "formally proves".

$$\vdash \alpha$$ "$$\alpha$$ has a formal proof".

Example: For every $$\alpha$$, $$\vdash ((\neg(\neg \alpha))\to \alpha)$$

$$(\neg\neg\neg\alpha\to (\neg \alpha \to \neg\neg\neg\alpha))$$ Axiom 1

$$(\neg\neg\neg\alpha\to (\neg \alpha \to \neg\neg\neg\alpha))\to((\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\alpha)\to(\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\neg\neg\alpha))$$ Axiom 2

By MP, $$((\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\alpha)\to(\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\neg\neg\alpha))$$.

$$((\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\alpha)\to(\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\neg\neg\alpha))\to $$ NEXT TIME!!!

---

### Theorem: Soundness

> For every WFF $$\alpha$$ if $$\vdash \alpha$$ then $$\alpha$$ is tautology.

### Proof: (By Generalized Induction on I(Axioms, MP)

Base Case: Check that every axiom is a tautology.

Induction Step: Assume both $$\alpha$$ and $$\alpha \to \beta$$ are tautologies.

Need to Show that $$\beta$$ is tautology.

By the way of contradiction, assume $$\beta$$ not a tautology. Then for some truth assignment $$v$$, $$\bar v(\beta)$$ = F. $$\bar v(\alpha)$$ = T, since $$\alpha$$ is a tautology.

$$\bar v(\alpha \to \beta)$$ = F, contradicting the assumption $$(\alpha \to \beta)$$ is a tautology.

### Proof: from Assumption

Let $$\sum$$ be a set of WFFs.

The set of formal theorems under the assumptions $$\sum$$ is $$T_h(\sum) = I(Axioms$$ U $$\sum, {mp})$$.

$$\alpha_1, ..., \alpha_n$$ is a formal proof under $$\sum$$ if each $$\alpha_i$$ is either an axiom or a member of $$\sum$$ or follows from some $$\alpha_j, \alpha_k,$$ where $$j, k < i$$ uing MP.

---

### Example:

Let $$\sum =\{A, (A /to B)\}$$.

Claim: $$\{A, (A\to B)\} \vdash B$$

$$A$$ (member of $$\sum$$)

$$(A\to B)$$ (member of $$\sum$$)

$$B$$ MP

### Example:

For every $$\alpha, \beta$$,

$$\{\alpha, (\neg\alpha)\} \vdash \beta$$

##### Formal Proof:

$$(\neg \alpha \to ((\neg \beta) \to (\neg alpha)))$$ (Axiom 1)

$$(\neg alpha)$$ (member of $$\sum$$)

$$((\neg \beta) \to (\neg alpha))$$ MP

$$(((\neg \beta) \to (\neg alpha))\to (\alpha \to \beta))$$ (Axiom 3)

$$(\alpha \to \beta)$$ MP

$$\alpha$$ (member of $$\sum$$)

$$\beta$$ MP

---

### Property of Proofs from Assumption

##### Extended soundness theorem

For every $$\sum, \alpha$$

if $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ then $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$.

(Substituting $$\sum = \varnothing$$ yields the basic soundness theorem)

##### Proof: (Notice that we can rephrase this theorem as: for any $$\alpha \in I(Axiom$$U$$\sum), \{MP\}) \sum \vDash \alpha$$)

Assignment

---

### Monotonicitys:

For every $$\sum, \sum ', \alpha$$

if $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ and $$\sum \subseteq \sum '$$, then $$\sum ' \vdash \alpha$$

In other words, $$\sum \subseteq \sum '$$ then $$Th(\sum)\subseteq Th(\sum ')$$

(Note that human reasoning does not enjoy this property)

##### Proof:

Since $$\sum \vdash\alpha$$, there is a construction sequence (formal proof) of $$\alpha$$ based on $$\sum$$ U $$ Axioms.

$$\alpha_1, ..., \alpha_n$$ = $$\alpha$$. Each $$\alpha_i$$ is either an axiom on $$\alpha_i\in\sum$$, but, in that case, $$\alpha_i\in \sum '$$.

On $$\alpha_i$$ is the outcome of MP on earlier $$\alpha_j, \alpha_k$$, therefore $$\alpha_1, ..., \alpha_n$$ is also a proof from $$\sum '$$.

---

### Strong Monotonicity:

If for every $$\alpha \in \sum '$$ $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ then $$Th(\sum ') \subseteq TH(\sum)$$.

### Example:

Let $$\sum = \{A, (A\to B)\}$$ and $$\sum ' = \{B\}$$

$$\sum \vdash \sum '$$ "every $$\alpha \in \sum '$$ does a proof under $$\sum $$"

It implies $$Th(\sum ') \subseteq TH(\sum)$$.

---

### The Deduction Theorem

For every $$\sum, \alpha, \beta$$,

$$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} \vdash \beta$$ if and only if $$\sum \vdash \alpha \to \beta$$.

(In particular $$\{\alpha\} \vdash \beta$$ iff $$\vdash(\alpha \to \beta)$$)

---

### Example:

For every $$\alpha,\beta,\gamma$$,

$$\{(\alpha\to\beta),(\beta\to\alpha)\} \vdash(\alpha\to\gamma)$$.

##### Proof:

Applying deduction, if suffices to show $$\{(\alpha\to\beta),(\beta\to\alpha),\alpha\} \vdash(\gamma)$$.

$$\alpha$$ (assumption)

$$(\alpha \to \beta)$$ (assumption)

$$\beta$$ (MP)

$$(\beta \to \gamma)$$ (assumption)

$$\gamma$$ (MP)

---

### Proof of the Deduction Theorem:

##### Easy Direction: (<=)

Assume $$\sum \vdash  (\alpha \to \beta)$$.

by monotonicity, $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\}\vdash(\alpha \to \beta)$$.

by strong monotonicity, it suffices to show that

$$\sum ' = \sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\}$$ U $$\{\alpha \to \beta\}\vdash \beta$$

##### Harder Direction: (=>)

Show that if $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} \vdash \beta then $$\sum \vdash (\alpha \to \beta)$$.

Rephrase this statement as, for all $$\beta \in Th(\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\})$$, $$\sum \vdash (\alpha \to \beta)$$.

Now prove by generalized induction on $$Th(\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\})$$ = $$I(Axiom$$U$$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\}$$, $$\{MP\})$$.

##### Base Case:

$$\beta$$ is in the core set.

**Case 1**: $$\beta$$ is an axiom.

$$\beta$$ (axiom)

$$(\beta \to (\alpha \to \beta))$$ (axiom 1)

$$(\alpha \to \beta)$$ (mp)

**Case 2**: $$\beta\in \sum$$

$$\beta$$ (assumption)

$$(\beta \to (\alpha \to \beta))$$ (axiom 1)

$$(\alpha \to \beta)$$ (mp)

**Case 3**: $$\beta == \alpha $$

So $$\sum \vdash (\alpha \to \beta)$$ is, in fact,

$$\sum \vdash (\alpha \to \alpha)$$ we showed that

$$\varnothing \vdash (\alpha\to\alpha)$$ use monotonicity.

##### Induction Step:

$$\gamma, (\gamma \to \delta)$$ implites $$\delta$$ (MP)

Assume $$\sum \vdash (\alpha \to \gamma)$$

and $$\sum \vdash (\alpha \to (\gamma \to \delta))$$

need to show $$\sum \vdash (\alpha \to \delta)$$

So our assumptions plut strong monotonicity imply that it suffices to show:

$$\sum$$ U $$\{(\alpha \to \gamma), (\alpha \to (\gamma \to \delta))\} \vdash (\alpha \to \delta)$$.

$$(\alpha \to (\gamma \to \delta)) \to ((\alpha \to \gamma) \to (\alpha \to \delta))$$ (Axiom 2)

$$(\alpha \to (\gamma \to \delta))$$ (Assumption)

$$((\alpha \to \gamma) \to (\alpha \to \delta))$$ (MP)

$$(\alpha \to \gamma)$$ (Assumption)

$$(\alpha \to \delta)$$ (MP)

---

### Example:

##### Claim:

For every $$\alpha$$, $$\vdash (\neg(\neg alpha ) \to \alpha)$$

##### Proof:

By the deduction theorem, it suffices to show:

$$\{\neg\neg \alpha\} \vdash \alpha$$.

formal proof:

$$((\neg\neg\alpha) \to (\neg\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\neg\alpha))$$ (Axiom 1)

$$\neg\neg \alpha$$ (assumption)

$$(\neg\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\neg\alpha)$$ (MP)

$$(\neg\neg\neg\neg\alpha \to \neg\neg\alpha)\to(\neg \alpha\to \neg\neg\neg \alpha)$$ (Axiom 3)

$$(\neg \alpha\to \neg\neg\neg \alpha)$$ (MP)

$$((\neg \alpha\to \neg\neg\neg \alpha)\to(\neg\neg\alpha \to \alpha))$$ (Axiom 3)

$$(\neg\neg\alpha \to \alpha)$$ (MP)

$$\neg\neg\alpha$$ (assumption)

$$\alpha$$ (MP)

---

### Important Syntactic Notion: Consistency

### Definition 1:

$$\sum$$ is consistent if

For no $$\alpha$$, $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ and $$\sum \vdash(\neg \alpha)$$

### Definition 2:

$$\sum$$ is consistent if and only if

there exists some $$\alpha$$ such that $$\sum \nvdash \alpha$$

### Claim:

The definitions are equivalent.

### Proof

Assume that for no $$\aslpha$$ does $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ and $$\sum \vdash \neg \alpha$$$.

Pick any $$\alpha$$ say $$\alpha = p$$, etiher $$\sum \nvdash \alpha$$ or, it does, then $$\sum \nvdash \neg\alpha$$.

In any case we found $$\beta $$ such that $$\sum \vdash \beta$$.

Assume that for some $$\beta$$ $$\sum \vdash \beta$$.

If the first definition is violated then, for some $$\alpha$$, $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ and $$\sum \vdash \neg \alpha$$.

Therefore $$\sum \vdash \sum$$ U $$\{\alpha ,\neg\alpha\} \vdash \{\alpha ,\neg\alpha\}$$.

$$\{\alpha ,\neg\alpha\} \vdash \beta$$ for every $$\alpha , \beta$$.

So $$\sum \vdash \beta$$ for every $$\beta$$. Contradicting our assumption!

---

Let $$\sum \subseteq \sum '$$ if $$\sum '$$ is consistent then so is $$\sum$$.

### Corollary

If any set of WFF's is consistent then, in particular $$\emptyset$$ is consistent.

Is $$\emptyset$$ consistent?

### The soundness theorem

If $$\vdash \alpha$$ then $$\alpha$$ is a tautology.

In particular $$\nvdash $$ p, since p is not a tautology.

| syntax                  | sementics              |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------- |
| definition of WFF       | truth assignments      |
| Proof system            | $$\alpha$$ satisfiable |
| $$\sum$$ consistent <=  | $$\sum$$ satisfiable   |
| $$\vdash \alpha$$ =>    | $$\alpha$$ tautology   |
| $$\sum\vdash\alpha$$ => | $$\alpha\vDash\beta$$  |
|                         | $$\sum\vDash\alpah$$   |
|                         | Compactness theorem    |

### Theorem

Every satisfiable $$\sum$$ is consistent.

### Proof

By way of contradiction, assume $$\sum$$ is inconsistent.

So for some $$\alpha$$, both $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ and $$\sum \vdash \neg \alpha$$.

If $$\sum$$ is satisfiable then for some truth assignment $$V$$, $$V$$ satisfies all WFFs in $$\sum$$

By soundness, $$\sum \vDahs \alpha$$ and $$\sum \vDahs \neg\alpha$$.

So for that assignment $$V$$, we get $$V(\alpha)$$ = T and $V(\neg\alpha)$$=T. It violates the truth table of $$\neg$$. Contradiction!!!

---

Is $$\sum = \{(P_i\to P_j) : i,j\in \mathbb{N}\}$$ consistent?

By our previous theorem, it suffices to show that $$\sum$$ is satisfiable.

For example, that all-True v satisfies every member of $$\sum$$.

---

# Definition:

We say that $$\sum$$ is maximally consistent

if $$\sum$$ is consistent but, for every $$\alpha$$ either $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ or $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\}$$ is inconsistent.

(Note that whenever $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$, $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\}$$ is no stronger than $$\sum$$. Namely, for every $$\beta$$, if $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} \vdash \beta$$ then $$\sum \vdash \beta$$.

### Example

Let $$\sum = \{P_1\}$$ (over the variables $$P_1, P_2,$$ ...)

##### Claim 1

$$\{P_1\}$$ is consistent. Since it is satisfiable.

##### Claim 2

$$\{P_1\}$$ is not maximally consistent.

Let $$\alpha = P_3$$, $$\sum \nvdash P_3$$ by soundness, it suffices to show that $$P_1 \nvDash P_3$$. Consider any truth assignment V such that V($$P_1$$) = T and V($$P_3$$) = F.

Then V satisfies $$P_1$$ but not $$P_3$$

Finally, note that $$\{P_1, P_3\}$$ is consistent. (since it is satisfiable)

---

### Claim

$$\sum = \{P_i: i\in \mathbb{N}\}$$ is maximally consistent.

(Over $$P_1, P_2,$$ ...)

### Proof

Why is my $$\sum$$ consistent?

- It is satisfiable by $$V_T$$.

Why is it maximally consistent?

> Need to show that for every $$\alpha$$ if $$\sum \nvdash \alpha$$ then $$\sum$$U$$\{\alpha\}$$ is not consistent.

We can already show that if $$\sum \nvDash \alpha$$ then $$\sum$$U$$\{\alpha\}$$ is not satisfiable. (since $$\sum$$ is maximally satisfiable)

---

$$\sum$$ consistent ~ A set of vectors A is linearly independent.

$$\sum$$ max consistent ~ A is maximally linear independent (A is a basis)

---

### Lemma

For every consistent $$\sum$$ there exists a maximally consistent $$\sum '$$ where $$\sum \subseteq \sum '$$.

### Proof

Let $$\alpha_1,..\alpha_n, ...$$ a list of all WFF's over $$\{p_1, p_2, ...\}$$.

Let $$\sum_0$$ be $$\sum$$, and construct a sequence of sets of WFFs $$\sum_0 \subseteq \sum_1 ... \subseteq \sum_n ...$$.

Such that

0. $$\sum_0$$ = $$\sum$$.
1. Each $$\sum_i$$ is consistent.
2. For every i, either $$\sum_i \vdash \alpha_i$$ or $$\sum_i \vdash \neg\alpha_i$$.

The construction of the $$\sum_i$$ is by induction on i,

$$\sum_0 = \sum$$ clearly satisfies our requirements 1 and 2.

Given $$\sum_i$$, if $$\sum_i\vdash \neg\alpha_i$$ let $$\sum_{i+1} = \sum_i$$.

(Then if $$\sum_i$$ satisfies 1,2 then so will $$\sum_{i+1}$$)

If on the other hand, $$\sum_i \nvdash \neg\alpha_{i+1}$$ then let $$\sum_{i+1} = \sum_i$$ U $$\{\alpha_{i+1}\}$$.

Claim: If $$\sum_i$$ satisfies 1 and 2 then so does $$\sum_i$$

Proof of claim: Requirement 2 follows by the definition of $$\sum_{i+1}. But why is $$\sum_{i+1}$$ consistent?

By way of contradiction,

Otherwise $$\sum_{i+1} \vdash \neg\alpha_{i+1}$$

(inconsistent $$\sum$$ proves everything)

Claim: If $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} \vdash \neg\alpha$$ then $$\sum \vdash \neg\alpha$$. (For every $$\sum$$ and $$\alpha$$)

By the claim, if $$\sum_{i+1}$$ is inconsistent then $$\sum_{i+1} \vdash \neg \alpha_{i+1}$$ but $$\sum_{i+1} = \sum_i$$ U $$\{\alpha_{i+1}\}$$ so $$\sum_i \vdash \neg\alpha_{i+1}$$. Contradiction!!!

We assumed $$\sum_i \nvdash \neg \alpha_{i+1}$$ and defined $$\sum_{i+1} = \sum_i$$ U $$\{\alpha_i\}$$.

Finally, defined $$\sum ' = U_{i\in \mathbb{N}}\sum_i$$ is maximally consistent.

Side claim: For every $$\sum$$, $$\alpha$$,

If $$\sum$$ U $$\{\alpha\} \vdash \neg \alpha$$ then $$\sum \vdash \neg\alpha$$.

Prove the subclaim, it suffices to show that $$\vdash(\alpha \to \neg\alpha)\to \neg\alpha$$.

Why does it suffice? Assume $$\sum $$ U $$\{\alpha\}\vdash \neg\alpha$$.

Then by deduction theorem, $$\sum \vdash(\alpha \to \neg\alpha)$$.

### Corollary

Our construction of $$\sum_i$$ is can be carried out while respecting requirements 0,1,2.

$$sum_{consistent} \subseteq \sum_{maxcons}'$$

Given $$\sum$$ we constructed $$\sum \subseteq \sum_1 ... \subseteq \sum_i ...$$. Now define $$\sum$$' = $$U_{i=1}^\infty \sum_i$$.

### Claim

The $$\sum$$' we constructed is maximally consistent.

##### Proof:

Maximality: For every $$\alpha$$, $$\alpha = \alpha_i$$ for some $$i \in \mathbb{N}$$. Therefore, by requirement 1, $$\sum_i \vdash \alpha_i$$ or $$\sum_i \vdash \neg\alpha_i$$, in other words, $$\sum_i \vdash \alpha$$ or $$\sum_i \vdash \neg\alpha$$.

Each $$\sum_i$$ is a subset of $$\sum$$'. Therefore by monotonicity, $$\sum$$'$$\vdash \alpha $$ or $$\sum$$'$$\vdahs \neg \alpha$$.

---

$$\sum$$' is also consistent: Assume by way of contradiction, it is not.

In that case, for some $$\alpha$$, $$\sum$$' $$\vdash \alpha$$ and $$\sum$$' $$\vdash \neg \alpha$$.

Let $$\beta_1 ... \beta_k$$ be a formal proof of $$\alpha$$ from $$\sum$$' and let $$\gamma_1 ... \gamma_k$$ a formal proof of $$\neg\alpha $$ from $$\sum$$'.

$$\sum \subseteq \sum_1 ... \subseteq \sum_i ...$$ each $$\beta_i$$ that is an assumption from $$\sum$$' belongs some $$\sum_{m_i}$$.

Similarly each $$\gamma_i$$ that is an assumption belongs to some $$\sum_{m_j}$$. Since both formal proofs are finite, there is some $$i^{th}$$ bigger than all of these $$m_i$$'s and $$m_j$$'s. 

Threfore for each $$\beta_i$$ or $$\gamma_j$$ that are used as assumptions $$\beta_i,\gamma_j\in \sum_i$$. Bow $$\sum_i\vdash \alpha$$ and $$\sum_i\vdash \neg\alpha$$.

So $$\sum_i$$ is inconsitent. Contradicting requirement 1 in our construction. 

|Syntax|Semantics|
|-|-|
|$$\sum$$ Consistent|<=>$$\sum$$ Satisfiable|
|$$\sum$$ Max Consistent|<=>$$\sum$$ Max Satisfiable|

### Theorem

Every consistent $$\sum$$ is satisfiable.

##### Proof

Let $$\sum$$' be a maximal consistent set of WFFs such that $$\sum \subseteq \sum$$'.

Define truth assignmnet $$V_{$$\sum$$'}$$ a follows.

$$V_{\sum}(P_i) = T$$ if $$\sum$$' $$\vdash P_i$$.

$$V_{\sum}(P_i) = F$$ Otherwise.

#### Claim

For every formula $$\alpha$$ 

$$V_{\sum$$'}($$\alpha$$) = T if and only if $$\sum$$'$$\vdash \alpha$$. 

### Theorem

For every consistent $$\sum$$ there exists a maximally consistent $$\sum '$$ where $$\sum \subseteq \sum '$$.

---

### The completness theorem

Every consistent $$\sum$$ is satisfiable

##### Proof

First step, pick $$\sum$$' where $$\sum \subseteq \sum$$' which is maximally consistent.

Second step, define truth assignment $$V_{\sum '}$$ as follows

For any propositional variable P

- $$V_{\sum '}(P)$$ = T if $$\sum$$'$$\vdash $$ P
- $$V_{\sum '}(P)$$ = F otherwise

##### Claim

For every formula $$\alpha$$, $$\sum$$'$$\vdash \alpha$$ iff $$V_{\sum '}(\alpha)$$ = T.

##### Proof of the claim by generalize induction on the set of all WFFs

I(propositional variables, $$\{\to,\neg\}$$)

##### Base:

$$\alpha = p$$ for some propositional variable p.

If $$\sum$$'$$\vdahs p$$ then, by the definition of $$V_{\sum'}$$, $$V_{\sum'}(p)$$ = T.

If $$\sum$$'$$\nvdahs p$$ then, by the definition of $$V_{\sum'}$$, $$V_{\sum'}(p)$$ = F.

##### Induction Step:

Assume the claim holds for $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$, need to show it for $$(\neg\alpha)$$ and for $$(\alpha\to\beta)$$.

Fist Case: $$(\neg\alpha)$$

If $$\sum' \vdash (\neg\alpha)$$ by the consistency of $$\sum'$$, $$sum' \nvdash \alpha$$.

By the induction hypothesis, $$V_{\sum'}(\alpha)$$ = F.

So by the truth table of $$\neg$$, $$V_{\sum'}(\neg\alpha)$$ = T.

If If $$\sum' \nvdash (\neg\alpha)$$ by its maximality of $$\sum'$$, $$sum' \vdash \alpha$$.

By the induction hypothesis, $$V_{\sum'}(\alpha)$$ = T.

So by the truth table of $$\neg$$, $$V_{\sum'}(\neg\alpha)$$ = F.

Second Case: $$(\alpha \to \beta)$$, if $$\sum'\vdash(\alpha\to\beta)$$ 

Either $$\sum'\vdash \alpha$$, in which case $$\sum'\vdash \beta$$.

Using the inductin hypothesis we get $$V_{\sum'}(\alpha)$$ = T, and $$V_{\sum'}(\beta)$$ = T so by the truth table of $$\to$$, $$V_{\sum'}(\alpha\to \beta)$$ = T.

If $$\sum'\ndash \alpha$$ so by induction hypothesis, $$V_{\sum'}(\alpha)$$ = F so by truth table $$V_{\sum'}(\alpha\to\beta)$$ = T.

Finally assume $$\sum'\ndash (\alpha\to\beta)$$.

Then $$\sum'\nvdash\beta$$, it it does we can use the axiom $$\beta\to(\alpha\to\beta)$$ and MP to et $$\sum'\vdash(\alpha\to\beta)$$ contradiction.

So by induction hypothesis $$V_{\sum'}(\beta)$$ = F.

We need to show $$V_{\sum'}(\alpha\to\beta)$$ = F.

Since we know already that $$V_{\sum'}(\beta)$$ = F.

Our claim hold unless $$V_{\sum'}(\alpha)$$ = F

Now by induction hypothesis this implies $$\sum'\ndash \alpha$$.

So by maximality, $$\sum'\vdash \neg\alpha$$.

Then $$\sum'\vdash(\alpha\to \beta)$$ contradiction.

SubClaim: If $$\sum'\vdash \neg\alpha$$ then $$\sum \vdash (\alpha\to\beta)$$.

Use deduction, suffices to show $$\sum'$$U$$\{alpha\} \vdash \beta$$ iff $$\sum$$U$$\{\alpha\}$$U$$\{\neg\alpha\} \vdash \beta$$.

$$\{\alpha,\neg\alpah\}\vdash \beta$$

|Syntax|Semantics|explain|
|-|-|-|
|$$\vdash\alpha$$|$$\alpha$$ i tautolog|=> soundness|
|$$\vdash\alpha$$|$$\alpha$$ i tautolog|<=|

### Completness Theorem

For all $$\alpha$$ and any set of WFFs $$\sum$$ if $$\sum \vDash \alpha then $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$

##### Proof

Othersixe, $$\sum \nvdash \alpha$$, then $$\sum $$ U $$\{\neg\alpha\}$$ is consistent.

So by our last result, $$\sum $$ U $$\{\neg\alpha\}$$ is satisfiable, so $$\sum \nvDash \alpha$$.

##### Claim: 

If $$\sum$$ is max consistent then it is max satisfiable

##### Proof

$$\sum$$ consitent => $$\sum$$ satisfiable

Since for every $$\alpah$$, $$\sum\vdash\alpha$$ or $$\sum\vdash\neg\alpha$$ we get by soundness $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$ or $$\sum\vDash\neg\alpha$$.

If $$\sum$$ is maximally satisfiable, 

satisfiable => consistent.

Since for every $$\alpha$$, $$\sum \vDash \alpha$$ or $$\sum \vDash \neg\alpha$$ we get by completeness, $$\sum \vdash \alpha$$ or $$\sum \vdash \neg\alpha$$, so $$\sum$$ is max-consistent.

##### Recall Compactness theorem

$$\sum$$ satisfiable iff every finite A$$\subseteq \sum$$ is satisfiable.

$$\sum$$ satisfiable iff $$\sum$$ is consistent (soundness, completeness)

$$\sum$$ is consistent iff Every finite A$$\subseteq \sum$$ is consistent (by finiteness of proofs)

Every finite A$$\subseteq \sum$$ is consistent iff Every finite A $$\subseteq \sum$$ satisfiable. (soundness, completeness)

### One big open Question

Is there a poly time algorithm to figure out if a given $$\alpha$$ is satisfiable P vs NP.

### Lengths of proofs

Is there a polynomial P(n) such that for every tautology $$\alpha$$, there is a formula proof of $$\geq P(\|\alpha\|)$$ length?

Does there exist any sound and complete propositional proof system with this property?

$$\alpha$$ not satisfiable iff $$\neg\alpha$$ is a tautology.

